docs: tiltfile config (#366)
windmilleng/tilt.build: docs/user_config.md

---

> title: User Config

Author: changed to "tiltfile config"

This doc describes how to describe your setup to Tilt to enable these
shorthands. We aim to make common cases trivial, while also supporting escape
hatches that enable arbitrarily-complex cases.

In order, we'll cover:
* Examples that cover common cases, showing both the Tiltfiles and accompanying
  usage.
* Describe how this is implemented. These details, especially around
  persistence, will let you understand how to write tooling that interacts with
  this system.
* Future work (we see how it fits in but don't plan to implement until there's
  concrete demand).

### Run only some services
Your app has many services, call them A, B, C, and D, and you want your users to
be able to run only a subset of them. E.g., `tilt up` will run all services, but
running `tilt up a b d` will run only the resources a, b, and d, ignoring c.
This is the same as the default `tilt up` behavior.

#### Command-Lines
* `tilt up`: run all services
* `tilt up a b d`: run A, B, and D but not C
* `tilt flags a b`: change running Tilt to run A and B but neither C nor D.
* `tilt up`: run all services

#### Tiltfile
```python
config.define_string_list("to-run", args=True)
cfg = config.parse()

> config.set_enabled_resources(cfg.get('to-run', []))

Author: > or is it just another way to achieve the default behavior?

at the end of the description of this example: "This is the same as the default `tilt up` behavior."

I've added it a couple more times to hopefully make it clear.

> does tilt flags a b work if you're just using the default behavior?

yes

```

### Run a defined set of services
Your app has many services, call them A, B, C, and D. You have defined modes you
want users to be able to start (e.g. consumer vs. enterprise) and you don't want
them to have to remember which service is necessary for which mode.
You want to be able to write a doc that tells users to run `tilt up consumer`
the first time and know that's enough that they'll be set up. Running Tilt
subsequent times without arguments should default to the mode they already have
set.

#### Command-Lines
* `tilt up`: run all services
* `tilt up consumer`: run only services in the "consumer" list
#### Tiltfile
```python
config.define_string_list("to-run", args=True)
cfg = config.parse()
groups = {
  'consumer': ['a', 'b', 'c'],
  'enterprise': ['a', 'b', 'd'],
}
resources = []
for arg in cfg.get('args', []):
  if arg in groups:
    resources += groups[arg]
  else:
    # also support specifying individual services instead of groups, e.g. `tilt up a b d`
    resources.append(arg)
config.set_enabled_resources(resources)
```

> ### Specify services to edit

Reviewer: hmm this seems unclear w/o context but I'm struggling to come up w/ how to phrase it...
> Run many services, specify a subset to edit

> Specify services to edit, run rest from pre-built image

You have many services that your users frequently need to run, but don't expect
to edit. Your YAML includes good enough images. (Perhaps they're from a suitably

> recent CI invocation, or refer to standard images.)

Reviewer: > Your YAML includes good enough images. (Perhaps they're from a suitably recent CI invocation, or refer to standard images.)

try:

> Your YAML references pre-existing images (perhaps they're from a suitably
recent CI invocation, or refer to standard images) such that the user can run the app without doing a Docker Build via Tilt

Reviewer: Maybe add something like:

> This pattern allows you to run the majority of your services from pre-existing images (avoiding the overhead of a Docker Build), while using Tilt to watch files and quickly update services you're actively developing on.

#### Command-Lines
* `tilt up`: run all services, editing none
* `tilt up -- --to-edit b`: run all services, editing b (the '--' indicates the
  end of `tilt up` options and the start of user-defined settings)
* `tilt up -- consumer --to-edit b --to-edit c`: run consumer services and set
  up b and c for editing.
#### Tiltfile
```python
config.define_string_list("to-run", args=True)
config.define_string_list("to-edit")
cfg = config.parse()

> # omitting the code from above Tiltfile that includes correct resources

Reviewer: this isn't super clear, looks like a comment. maybe:

```
for arg in cfg.get('args', []):
    ... # omitting the code from above...
```

# Only configure the build for services we want to edit
# Thanks to Tilt's existing behavior, an image that is mentioned in YAML but has no build set
# will use the existing tag.

> to_edit = cfg.get('to-edit', [])

Reviewer: is it easier or harder to read if you do:
```
def docker_build_for_service(svc):
    docker_build(svc, './{}'.format(svc))

for svc in to_edit:
    docker_build_for_service(svc)

if 'a' in to_edit:
  docker_build('a', './a')
if 'b' in to_edit:
  docker_build('b', './b')
if 'c' in to_edit:
  docker_build('c', './c')
if 'd' in to_edit:
  docker_build('d', './d')
```

## The Config File
In addition to config settings coming from command-line args, Tilt will read
them from a `tilt_config.json` in the same directory as the `Tiltfile`, if one

> exists. It should contain a single JSON dict, where the keys are config setting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
exists. This file should contain a single JSON object, where the keys are config setting
```

names and the values are their values (e.g., `{"to-edit": ["b", "c"]}`).
As with any other file read by the Tiltfile, if this config file is changed
while Tilt is running, Tilt will pick up that change and reexecute the Tiltfile.
If the same setting is specified in both the config file and the command-line

> args, the value from the args takes precedent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
args, the value from the args takes precedence.
```

Reviewer: but also I don't know if we want to encourage using the config file for this sort of ephemeral/frequently changed arg?

## Changing args at runtime

> While Tilt is running, if the user decides they need a different set of

Reviewer: why isn't this in 2nd person like the rest of the doc?

Author: Hm, the 2nd person for the rest of the doc is the Tiltfile author, while the user here is anyone using that Tiltfile. The doc also has several passages along the lines of "You want to do X for your users".

This is a post-hoc explanation so I don't know if it's just a rationalization, but it seems reasonable to me?

Reviewer: aah. sure, that's fine

user args (i.e., args handled by config.parse, not args to tilt itself like
`--hud`) than what they passed to `tilt up`, they can use `tilt flags` to
replace them. `tilt flags --clear` tells Tilt to clear the set of user args in
use.

> Note that settings from user args always take precedent over settings from the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that settings from user args always take precedence over settings from the
```

implementation:
```python
config.define_string_list("args", args=True)
cfg = config.parse()
config.set_enabled_resources(cfg.get('args', []))
```

## Future Directions
This section describes places we expect the config to go. Let us know if any of
these would be particularly helpful to you and your team.
### More Kinds of Settings
You should be able to define more kinds of settings. For example, a bool, an
an enum, or a singly-valued string. By moving error-checking to the built-in
library, you can make your Tiltfile shorter and more correct.
### Better Config Manipulation/Discovery
Your users should be able to understand what reasonable values are. This could
be from help output, tab-completion, or in the Web UI.
Tilt should provide a way to manipulate tilt_config.json.
Your users should be able to modify the config in the Web UI.
### Escape Hatch for Argument Parsing
You should be able to use a custom syntax for command-line arguments. The config
module could take a function that would parse a command-line into JSON.
### Interaction with load/include
Tiltfiles that are used via `load`/`include` should be able to define and use

> config settigs.

Reviewer: (mention the current behavior)

Author: you missed the typo!!!!

Author: Hmm, do you think that's important? I'd figured the obvious inference was "currently they cannot define and use config settings", but maybe that leaves open "well can they define config settings but not use them? use config settings but not define them?"

Author: (I ask because I think describing the current behavior would really overwhelm this bullet with cognitive load - you're not allowed to define new settings in any file after any file has called config.parse, and you're not allowed to call config.parse from multiple Tiltfiles in different directories. It seems more to the point just to give people the sense that they shouldn't go there)

Reviewer: eh, fair point -- that's fine then, leave as is
